I can tell you that we do live in an
open universe which means we're
expanding out forever. Right? So there
is no sight line that will come back to
where we are. It goes out because the
sighteline is continually moving.
Correct. In a closed universe the
universe will recolapse so that a sight
line in principle will ultimately come
back. And the way to think about that is
just the surface of a sphere, right?
Call it a perfect spherical balloon.
We're all crawling around on the surface
of that balloon.
And don't look at me. I'm not an
astrophysicist.
[Music]
This is Star Talk. Neil Degrass Tyson,
your personal astrophysicist. We're
doing cosmic queries today. And that
means Chuck is sitting right next to me.
Yes. How you doing, Chuck? Hey, what's
happening? Is this a topic or is it
grabbing? You know what it is? Oh, it's
galactic gumbo. That's right. That's
right. We won't give no way in here. I'm
going to give him some put it down. I'm
going put on some guy on pepper. Didn't
he die like 20 years ago? I don't Paul
Prudome. Is that his name? I don't know
his name. Have you seen him lately? No.
No, I have not. And my boy was packing
some weight. I haven't seen him in 20
years. Okay.
Well, we thank him for granting you that
accent. Damn that that's that don't
say whatever. So this is random and but
they're all Patreon members whoever they
want. But that it's only Patreon
members. Correct. Okay. I haven't seen
any of these questions. No, you do not
get to see them and I'm supposed to see
them but I'm lazy so I don't see.
Okay. All right. Here we go. Yeah. Uh
this is writer's eye who says, "Hello
everyone. I hope your day is filled with
protons from only friendly stars." Oh,
or maybe he meant photons. Photons.
Yeah. Did he say protons or did you
misread it? No, it says protons. You
didn't misread it because sometimes you,
you know, you would read the thing. I
thought maybe reading is fundamental. It
is fundamental.
No, I thought maybe he was, you know,
talking about like a pulsar or something
and so, you know, send out sending
particles out. Okay. But no, uh, he
probably didn't mean photons. All right.
From friendly stars. He says, "How far
are we away from being able to track
gravity waves? I know we can detect
them, so tracking them would be the next
obvious step." In my humble opinion,
that is. If we could track them,
eventually we could map the universe
edge to edge. Am I correct in thinking
that? So, a couple things. First, a
technicality, right? The kind of waves
made by gravity waves by two colliding
black holes. Okay, those are called
gravitational waves. Gravitational
waves, right? Okay, gravity waves is
something else that acoustical people is
a term people use when they refer to a
medium that's rising and falling in
response to a a pressure uh impulse that
goes through it. So those are gravity
waves that they call. So we have to make
sure that the the kingdom is is
separated. Okay. the the lexographic
nice the the lexographic reference has
to be correct distinct. So gravitational
waves. So okay uh we detect them when
they wash over us, right? That's what
LIGO did. That's what earned the Nobel
Prize, right? And you know who earned
the Nobel Prize? Kip Thorne, who was one
of the executive producers on
um Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Wait.
It's the String Theory movie with
Matthew McConey. It's called
Interstellar. Interstellar. Yes. Good.
So, in fact, we we took our crew out to
Pasadena where he lives, went to his
home office and interviewed Kip Thorne.
Very cool. Yeah. Yeah. You can find it
on our archives. Uh, and he showed us
his Nobel Prize. That was cool. You just
keep that thing, huh? I know, right?
What do you wear around your neck? What
do I What else to do with that? I would
take it everywhere. Oh, yeah. You know
what I mean? Excuse me. Do you know what
time it is? I'm like, "Oh, excuse me.
Let me move my Nobel Prize out of the
way so I can see my watch. I don't How
did that get there? Where did that come
from? Oh my goodness. Is that my Nobel
Prize and where my watch should be? Oh
my
goodness. So, here's what I learned
recently. That yes, we can detect
certain energy levels of gravitational
waves that wash over Earth, right? And
there's certain other phenomena in the
universe that do make gravitational
waves that those detectors cannot see.
Okay. Okay. Now, there's something I
only know a little bit about here, so I
just want to put it on the table. Okay.
All right. That there's a research
program that's going to be put into play
that wants to detect the effect of
gravitational waves moving
across your field of view. So if you
have a pulsar which has very very
precise spinning rates the most accurate
clock you can set a clock by it. Okay.
If a gravitational wave passes by it,
right, there's a change in the rate,
right? You'll see the the rhythm change.
The rhythm change just briefly. Yes. And
so the idea is you monitor all the
pulsars. You get their rhythms known,
right? And then you see one change and
then you look to see if it is there if
it coincides with a gravitational wave.
Well, well, that would be the evidence.
Now you see if it moves to the next one
and then the next one. All right. And
now you would see the consistency across
each post. Correct. And you'd be
watching a gravitational wave move
across the medium of space. That's
amazing. Yes. And we're not there yet.
But that's unfortunately we had to cut
that. The funding for it has been cut
already. We've saved so much money by
not even thinking about it. You know it.
I know it.
Let me on that subject. Let me remind
you how much money NASA gets from the
government. What this is this is the
space station, space shuttle, Hubble,
JWST, James Webb, everything that NASA
does. Everything NASA does. We're going
back to the moon, including looking back
at Earth and weather and everything. No,
the weather would be Noah. That's Noah.
Okay. Okay. But there there there's a
strong collaboration between them. The
Yeah, the two of them are right. You
know, I It was like 10 years after Noah
was founded that I caught on that it's
like pronounced like Noah, like Noah's
Arc. Like Noah's Arc. Yeah, cuz he was
the first weatherman. What are you
thinking? Oh my god. All right. So, I
didn't I'm just catching. You just
caught that now. Just now you had to
actually spell it out. He was the first
weatherman. And hey, it's going to rain.
God says it's going to rain, man. People
were like, "What are you talking about,
Noah? What are you talking about? It
hasn't rain. It has never rained here.
Never. I'm telling you, man. I'm
building a boat. It's going to
rain. Oh. Oh, crazy. No. There he goes
again, you know. So,
well, he did grow grapes as my
understanding and made might have made
some wine drink. Maybe man made a little
the Bible references that he did drink.
Yeah. Yes. But go ahead. So the Noah, by
the way, if he did drink, I'm just
saying that's rough. Just like I'm
telling you right now, it's going to
rain. The Lord spoke to me. Told me.
Yeah. Who's going to believe that,
right? Told me to get three of every
animal. I think it was two. Anyway, go
ahead. Let's move on. Okay. So, of
course, they spelled N O A and then N O
A A.
national oceanic and atmospheric
administration. Okay. So, yeah, no one
makes those. So, just to remind people
how much money so of your tax dollar,
right? It is 410 of 1 cent. So, it's not
even a full penny. Yeah. So, you can say
I want to save money there, right? But
then what total impact is that going to
have given all the rest of the spending
that's going on, right? It's not a very
efficient means of cost cutting. Yeah.
So if you have a department of
efficiency, it could be more efficient
about where it's being efficient.
Right. I think we need to be efficient
with the department of efficiency.
Exactly. Right. Okay. Next one. Here we
go. Let's move on to Maurice Van
Derindon. This is Maurice Vand Derindon.
He says, "Hey Neil. Hey Chuck. been
wondering about something Jan 11 said
once in your episodes that it might be
possible that if you look far enough
into the cosmos your line of sight can
loop around and the universe can end up
at your position just along the
timeline. Doesn't this imply that if
true the universe is a perfect 4D
sphere? You would see your past location
in your case a young solar system from
every angle. So it would appear smeared
out across the cosmic horizon. Love the
show. Kind regards Maurice from Harlem
in the Netherlands. Oh, Harlem. Yes.
Yes. Harlem. Uh, it's where we got our
name. Harlem Harlem here in New York.
New York. Yeah. Back when the Dutch were
running. Yeah. They owned it all. They
owned it all. They put in all the canals
because they we have Canal Street. Yes.
You know, and Dutch that's what they do.
Absolutely. Even back then. Oh, nothing
but canals.
So I I don't know if I can answer it in
the precision that's here talking about
but I can tell you that we do live in an
open universe which means we're
expanding out forever right so there is
no sight line that will come back to
where we are it goes out because the
sighteline is continually moving correct
and out away from us and out away from
us so there's no way that you could loop
back always going in a closed universe
we the universe will recolapse so that a
a sighteline in principle will
ultimately come back. And the way to
think about that is just the surface of
a sphere, right? Call it a balloon, a
perfect spherical balloon. We're all
crawling around on the surface of that
balloon. And if you send out a beam of
light, it would go away from you, but
then come around, come back and hit you
in the back of the head. Right. Right.
But that would be later, right? Okay.
And as the balloon begins to shrink back
because it's well wouldn't have to
shrink. It just has to be closed. But if
it's closed, it will shrink.
H don't look at me. I'm not an
astrophysicist.
So the cosmic microwave background,
right? We have done some experiments to
test for this. Oh, so the micro
background is in every direction, right?
So if you look this way and you get an
exact I know exactly the patterning
that's happening there. Mhm. And then
you just
look that way, turn around, right? Is
that exact pattern pattern? If because
if that's the thing, then that means
they are the same place, right? That
means that was a line that went around
and met on the other side, right? Okay.
We haven't found that. We haven't. No,
but we've looked my point. We've looked
very carefully for statistically
significant repeated patterns all
throughout the cosmic. Gotcha. Okay.
Yeah. Okay. Okay, so that's the best I
can answer that. No, that's a great
answer. Janna might have come in with
some more teeth in that answer. Well,
yeah. Well, leave it to Janna. Yeah, you
know, she's always a mindblower. That's
very cool. All right. This is Iiggore.
Vhaneek. Vhan. Igore. This is not Young
Frankenstein. Okay. Igor.
I think in Young Frankenstein, he's
Igore. He's Igore, but he's also Marty
Feldman who has big giant bug eyes. So,
I think they were. Anyway, uh, he says,
"Hello, gentlemen." And is he Dr.
Frankenstein, right? Dr. Frankenstein.
But I thought I E is an E and EI is an
I. Yeah. Einstein. Oh, Einstein.
And I E is an E. I don't You didn't know
that? You never heard that? Listen, I
can barely get I before E except after C
and except in Neil, right? And except in
science and except in Keith. Yeah. So, I
think they they got rid of that rule.
And I spell all those words wrong. I
think they got I'm not even lying. They
got I I would Yeah, I'm an exception to
that rule and so is a whole lot boatload
of other words. All right, here we go.
He says, "Hey, gentlemen. Uh, my name is
Igor from Zagreb, Croatia. I'm a
first-time caller."
I like what he did there. That's good.
Excellent. He says, "I've always
wondered if there are higher dimensions,
could the expansion of the universe be
caused by spacetime falling into another
dimension? Like if our 3D space was a
waterfall falling into a higher
dimension and we simply perceive it as
expanding in all directions, what would
it mean for dark energy? Thank you, man.
Interesting. First of all, let me just
tell you, Igor, I do not know what kind
of weed you are smoking in Croatia.
But that is Please send some here. Yes,
send us some of that Croatian weed over
here.
Go ahead. Uh what a weird concept of our
spaceime. So here's the thing. Falling
into another dimension, right? It
there's no evidence that one dimension
is susceptible to another dimension in
that way. Correct? So for example, let's
take the surface of a table, right? How
many dimensions is that? That's two.
Two. It just has a length and a width.
No depth. No depth. And then I have
another surface of a table. So I I can
make that table infinite. Right.
Correct. Now I can have another table
that's separated from it that's also
infinite and they're just running
parallel. They just run parallel and
they're not there's no no one there's no
interaction. It's in a third dimension
and there's no I can embed a
two-dimensional surface in three
dimensions and it'll just sit there as
two dimensions as two dimensions inside
of a three
dimens. It does it's not calling to you.
Okay. But here is something that's
related. Okay. Again, it's not exactly
answering the question, but it addresses
the question. All right, that's good.
Right. In our world, we have quantum
physics where a lot of mysterious things
happen. It's not mathematically
mysterious. It's just intellectually
mysterious. Particles pop in and out of
existence. Matter and energy are
equivalent. Particles behave in the same
way over entangled. You know, there's
weirdness that's going on.
We can describe it mathematically
though. Is that weirdness completely
normal in a higher dimension? Let's just
ask for that. So what would be an
example? Uh let's go back to our 2D
world. Okay. And we're there. We're
walking around or slithering around. 2D
people get around. We're line drawing.
Yeah. We are only our perimeters to each
other. Right. Right. Suppose we're
looking around and we see a dot. Right.
It just came out of nowhere. Yes. It's
like particles popping into existence.
There's a dot. Where'd that come from? I
don't know. Right. And then we keep
watch. We study it. We're scientists. We
study it. And the dot becomes a circle
and the circle
grows and we say and we're studying.
We're making measurements. Then it grows
to like a maximum point and then it
starts shrinking back and it gets
smaller and smaller. Then it's a dot.
Then it disappears. Wow. We'd be coming
up with all kinds of theories, right?
Aliens. Aliens. Because we live in rural
America where the the rural part of the
paper city people see. We're we're in
the rural part of the paper where the
two dimensional where the dot
tell I was out in the middle of night
dot showed up got bigger and bigger.
Okay. Go ahead. So we can't explain
that. We don't understand it. Right. And
is it like the studying the elephant but
you don't see the whole elephant? Yeah.
Okay. You get seven different
descriptions. The the the trunk, the
tusk, the leg, the toenails, the tail,
the the side. None of those comport
until you take a step back and say
you're all describing the same creature.
Okay? And that's the full understanding
that no one gets at first. Do you know
what I just described?
A hole.
No. I described a sphere passing through
the paper the paper because at one point
it's just a dot because it's a single
point of the sphere that's touching the
two-dimensional plane. But as you
continue to move the sphere through then
what you have is more points in a 360
sphere that keep fanning out but only in
two dimensions. So they make a hole that
keeps getting bigger a circle and then
and how big does a circle get? at
whatever the size of the diameter
diameter and then you come back and then
you down one point again and here we are
mysteriously inventing forces and
phenomenon and it's just a normal wow
it's just a normal sphere wow in the
higher dimension of this example which
is three dimensions but to us in two
dimensional in ro in rural paper stand
paper stand in rural paper stand
that was a serious phenomenon that was a
serious and they're reporting that to
the government Right. And people are
trying to capture the next one. Oh wow.
That's great. So if higher dimensions
pass through or otherwise interact, it
can be very mysterious. Could be right.
Wow, dude. What a great question. I So
he was trying to account for the dark
energy. I don't know what could be
happening in a higher dimension to
manifest in our dimensionality as dark
energy. Right. Could that could be a
thing, right? It could be. Yeah. All
right. This is Natt Woods who says,
"Good day, Professor Tyson and Lord Nice
Adelaide here from Australia."
That was the best I could do, guys.
That's pretty good. I tried. That's
That's good. Not as good as your French
accent. No, but I tried. Okay. Or your
gumbo accent, but yeah. He said, "I was
wondering if we can if we can't ever
truly touch anything, could the space
between particles be dark matter pulling
the particles together or dark energy
repulsing the particles?" Well, there's
another thing pulls particles, but
anyway, I enjoy every podcast. Don't
editorialize on the man's question. I
was thinking out loud. I'm sorry. I'm
sorry. And I'm sorry, Nat. I enjoy every
podcast and I remain inspired by you
guys every day. Please keep up the good
work. Anyway, excellent. Okay, you
answer. Are you choosing those because
people say nice things about you in each
one? I have no idea. Well, I've never
seen Okay, I should not say that. No, I
would never do that. He's paid to read
them in advance. Oh, I see. Let that let
the record show. Exactly.
Okay. So, now I forgot the question. So,
he's basically saying like if we can
never touch anything truly, then could
it be dark matter in between the
touching that's pushing or pulling? All
right. So, it turns out dark matter
does not interact with itself as
potently as regular matter does.
Interesting. Okay. So when regular
matter gets together, right, it's
molecules grab on. You make solid
objects, liquid, gas. It it'll it'll
make Okay, you So we have regular matter
planets, right? We have rocks because
that's what regular matter does using
the electromagnetic force in case you
were wondering. All right, dark matter,
what we call dark matter, which is
really dark gravity, does not respond to
the electromagnetic force at all. At
all. Doesn't interact. doesn't interact.
Okay? So, it doesn't interact with us
that way. Okay? Nor does it interact
with itself that way. It does interact
gravitationally, though. So, you can
have pockets of dark matter out there,
but nowhere is it so dense that you have
solid objects. Wow. As far as we can
tell, there's no solid dark matter out
there. Okay. By the way, if it was if it
did exist, it would just pass through
you because it doesn't interact. It
doesn't interact anyway. with any force
that's holding you together, right? It's
got another instruction set. Let it slip
right through my hands. So, particles,
we already have accounted for their
behavior with the forces that are known,
right? We there's nothing mysterious
there. Now, he might have known that we
don't actually touch things because it
was an episode of Cosmos where we did
that. As you bring two things together,
you feel like you're touching, but
what's happening is the electromagnetic
forces are repelling each other and
you're responding to the forces thinking
that it's a solid thing, but it's not.
And that is why you have foury olds all
over the world in the backup cards
going, "I'm not touching you. I'm not
touching you. I'm not touching you."
Okay, I'm not touching you. All right,
here we go. This is This is Stson. And
Stson says hello there like Madonna this
is just share he's just Stson he says
hello Dr. Tyson and Lord nice Stson here
from the US but currently living in
Japan. Ah well yes uh Konichiwa he says
the study of planets including ours is
quite fascinating. The internal
structure of our planet is generally
agreed upon. But how would we be able to
understand the internal structure of
other planets, even those nearby? Great
question. Great question. So,
we make educated guesses and then we
test the guess. Oh, we making this up.
No, that's not what I said. We just
making it up as we go along. Oh my god,
that is breaking
news. Breaking news.
All right, let's take ahead. Let's take
Mercury. Okay, Mercury for example.
Okay, Mercury is tiny, right? Very small
and small and closest to the sun, right?
Oh, yeah. It's the closest planet.
Closest. Okay. In fact, our moon might
even be bigger than Mercury. What? Yeah,
I I have to check that. But it's it's
it's small. It's small. Okay. Okay. But
it's a full up legit planet. Okay. But
what's going on? Well, we can measure
its mass.
Its mass is way
higher than it could possibly be if
Mercury was composed only of rock. Like
the moon, the moon is made of rock
through and through.
Mercury, it has much more mass. So, we
go to the periodic table of elements and
we say, "Here's the birth ingredients of
the solar system." Wow. We know that
because that's what the sun is made of.
That's what Jupiter's Jupiter didn't
give up any mass that it was born with.
So, you look at the composition on
Jupiter, it matches that of the sun.
Okay. Anybody else who's different, you
you've been horse trading your
ingredients along the way. All right.
So, Jupiter was trying to be the sun.
It's true. That's what Jupiter was
trying. Jupiter was just like, I'mma get
one day. In fact, Jupiter is the only
planet that radiates more energy than it
receives from the sun. Oh, I didn't know
that. That's how that's how that's how
wannabe it was. That's how wannabe sun
it was. Yeah, it still does. It's still
rad. All right, that's a great factoid.
Go ahead. So, I go to the periodic table
and I say of all these elements, some
are very rare, some are not basically
not really in the solar system. So, I'm
going to ignore those. and which are
common and and so nickel, iron, these
are pretty common in the
universe. So maybe I get the mass of
Mercury fitting into that volume by
throwing in something heavier than rock
because we know it's rock on the surface
because we see the cratering looks just
like the surface of the moon. Okay, so
but deep inside what could be there. Now
we know when it formed heavy stuff goes
to the middle cuz it's it's it's a fluid
thing. It's molten, right? If you're
molten and you're heavy, you're going to
sink. Sink, right? You're going to sink.
Okay. So, we ask ourselves, how much
iron has to be there to give us that
mass to get that mass at that size,
which is basically the density, right?
So, the average density, we construct
the average density of the object
pulling from the periodic table of
elements we know are in the universe.
So, we find out it has a huge core of
iron. That's dope. It's dope. That is
That is dope. Okay. I'm tell God damn
it. That is science right there, buddy.
Oh, it works the other way, too. Really?
We've discovered asteroids, okay, and we
know they're rocky, but we look at the
density and it's like these are way less
dense than rock. Rock, right? Less
dense, right? What's going on? Oh,
that's so cool. What's going on? Cuz you
see the the volume of it. And it's a
fuzzy image, you know? We're not
looking. These are not missions that go
there. It's not like we got binoculars.
Harold,
look at this ass droid. Where'd you get
Harold? I don't. Anyway, go ahead. I
know. Harold and the purple crayon cuz
he went Harold went into the sky with
his purple crayon. There you go. So, I
liked Harold. It's a great great Yeah,
everybody does. So, how do you have rock
that has less mass than rock? It ain't
rock. Well, well, it's got to be made
out of stuff that we know about, right?
So that was the first idea that maybe
some asteroids are piles of rubble.
Nice.
So that there's so they're they're
coalesed but they're not stuck together.
They're not stuck together. So when we
look at the total mass and the total
size the volume some of that volume is
taken up by nothing, right? Confounding
our our deduction for what its density
is. Like a floating ball of pebbles.
Pebbles. There'll be so much space in
between each pebble that that floating
ball does not have the density of a
rock. Overall density is lower than
rock. So that matters because we want to
deflect an asteroid. You can't just go
up to it and push on it if it's a rubber
pile cuz that Now you got a bunch of
little rocks coming your way cuz you
Bruce Willis, you messed up bad. So you
get to push off a chunk of it and the
rest doesn't is not attached. Exactly.
If it's not attached, you didn't have
any effect on it. Right. So, so this
density estimates, these density
estimates are a major part of what folks
in the solar system do. Super cool, man.
So, Mercuryy's small. It's the It's the
smallest planet, right? A title formerly
held by
Pluto. Poor Pluto. Why do you sigh like
that? You know, you in my office,
there's no sympathy for Pluto in my
office. I know, but you're like, you
know, you're like Kendrick and Drake. I
mean, you won. You won. Don't Why you
got to beat the guy up?
Okay. But go ahead. Okay. So, Mercury
and the moon are about the same size.
Mercury might be a little bigger.
However, Mercury has four times the mass
of our moon. Wow. Same size, four times
the mass. And we know it's rocky on the
surface because they both have equal
looking features on the surface. So,
what's going on? We know the moon has
hardly any iron, right? Because it was
sideswiped off of Earth's crust from the
the It's crusty, baby. It's crusty.
That's the moon. The moon is crusty. So
we think
iron rest deeply with and largely within
the center of of Mercury boosting its
total mass relative to other normal
objects. That's how that's how we roll
when we make the calculations. Very
cool. All right, let's let's got time
for a few more, I think. Yeah. Yeah, we
got some time. Let's rock and roll here.
This is West. We're getting through
these quick. We are getting through. We
are actually getting it. Is this like
the most we've done? And I hope people
are okay recognizing that we're getting
to you as quickly as we can. Hello Dr.
Tyson Lord Nice. I'm Wes from Davenport,
Iowa. And I for one want to say I
appreciate your programming and
expertise. It acquires more than you
know. No, it requires exactly what we
know. We're doing it. Anyway, it's an
expression. More than you know. It
really is an I know. And we appreciate
it. Uh my question, by the way, I I used
to wrestle. Go ahead. Iowa knows
wrestlers. Iowa. Iowa. Yeah. That's cuz
you know when you grow up wrestling
cows. Is that what that is? Yeah.
Getting in. Is that where they kick my
ass every time? Getting in the circle
don't mean nothing.
I was. Yeah. They're hauling calves. You
holding hauling. Where did I put the
calves? Put it over there. Where do I
put this? That shoot over there, dummy.
Yeah. Anyway,
Iowa
wrest proud tradition of wrestlers in
Iowa. Yeah. Very cool. He says, uh, my
question is regarding black holes and
what happens when they collide? With
recent theory enhancements from great
minds, is there now mathematical
equations that work to model this
expected action and reaction? Can we
mathematically reproduce the collision
of black holes with absolute
consistency? Yes. And because we have
the mathematics of it, the it's the math
that predicted the black hole to begin
with, right? So, we already had the
math. It's not like here here's this
object. Oh my gosh, how do I describe
it? Einstein's general theory of
relativity, right, predicted black
holes. Even though he was antilo, did
you know this? Yeah. Well, he was a
racist.
They all were back then. No, he actually
wasn't. No, he wasn't. No, if you read
his uh ideas and opinions, it's a book,
right? It was Hubble who was the racist.
Yeah, Hubble had issues. Yeah, he has
Hubble had issues when Marian Anderson
after she was denied singing
opportunity. She's opera singer in in
Constitution Hall, Washington DC. Cuz
that was run by the Daughters of the
Confederate. Confederacy. Okay. That's
when Roosevelt said, "You can sing on
the steps of the Lincoln Memorial." Wow.
Okay. Einstein is active around then.
This is like the 1930s and I think it
was the 30s. Roosevelt was president
regardless. Okay. So, yeah, it would
have been the 30s. We weren't at war
yet. And
uh she visited Princeton and visited
Einstein on the Princeton campus. Wow.
He was receiving of people who were
otherwise uh wellknown but had issues
with dealing with, you know, society
societ societ societal issues. Yeah. So
he was a very forward thinking person.
Very cool. Well, yeah. I mean, it's
great to see that being how he was so
brilliant. Yeah. But also, I mean, as a
a Jew escaping the rise of Nazi German
he had some motivation. Yeah, he had and
and some empathetic empathetic behaviors
because Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah.
Yeah. And he predicted gravity waves I
mean gravitational waves which means
that the math was already there. Math
was already there. Right. Right. And so
so math was in place and then we say it
must be but he he did not believe that
matter would do would be
so he didn't think the universe would be
that mean to matter really. Yeah.
Interesting. Yeah. The matter is closing
in on itself. Right. And it collapses
with nothing to stop it. Exactly. Down
to a singularity. Yes. It doesn't make
any sense. Doesn't make any sense. So he
said it must but it can't be. And then
we have been up there and fine and black
holes. Look at that. We got them. That's
so crazy. So, so yes, it can be
completely described. And what's
interesting about it is the two black
holes enter each other's event horizon.
That's where it gets fun. Oh, really?
Yeah. What if there isn't a dominant
black hole? What if they are both mirror
identities? What happens then? Oh, you
cuz
you you're imagine in most scenarios one
black hole is like Yeah. dominant. Yeah.
One black hole is just like, you know,
you in my part of space now and I'm
hungry, right?
So, I I got news for you. We're going to
be one black hole, but it's going to be
me.
Did you one time imitate a black hole
eating a No, you had some voice. What
was that? No. What did I do? It was
something Oh, no. U because I was sad
black holes are just like, "Hey, hey,
hey.
That is exactly what they would sound
like. Oh my goodness. If they spoke
English and if sound could move through
space, that's what they'd be saying.
Another black hole. A tasty snack.
Okay.
So, yeah, but that's my my concept is
that one of them would be dominant
always, but the math
doesn't care. math. What is bigger or
smaller equal? Doesn't make a
difference. Here's the thing. When they
merge, you have a new black hole, right?
That is exactly the mass of the two of
them summed together. Oh, and that's all
that counts. That's all that counts. And
then you have a bigger black hole. There
you go. You think we're new, but we're
not new.
Uh, this is Jared Higgby who says,
"Greeting Dr. Tyson and Lord Chucky
Baby."
This is Jared Higgby from Alamo, Nevada.
Um, is the north and south sides of a
magnet actually different in any way
outside of the attraction and repelling
effects? How would you determine which
side of a magnet is which?
Interesting. Okay. So, you don't have
anything to go on because you can't turn
them and attract or turn them and repel.
You have to determine which one is north
and which one is south. It
is
completely arbitrary.
Really? Yes.
Do tell. Okay, I
will. What I mean by arbitrary is that
we all decide what to agree on and then
that's the answer. Ah, it's not a
fundamental thing in the universe that
tells this is north. That's right. I got
you. There's there's no whispering
secret force operating on this. So, by
definition, now think remember like
poles will do what? They repel. Repel
and opposite poles attract. Okay. Okay.
So, by definition, if you have, let's
say, a bar magnet because it'll work
better and you hold it with a string in
the middle and it'll turn, the part that
points north on Earth is the north pole
of the magnet. And that's it. You just
have to do that once and then I'll set
all the other magnets. Every other
magnet is just like that's it. That's
it. It's been decided, guys. That's
right. There's no need to make a choice.
It's been decided for decided for us by
that one. Okay. So now what that means
is if the north pole of your magnet is
pointing to the north pole of the earth,
where is the earth's south magnetic
pole?
Wait a minute. If the wait the north
pole of a magnet, yes, is pointed
towards the north pole of the earth,
what attracted it? The south magnet.
Yes.
[Music]
I got it. God, no. Come back, Chuck. I
need you.
That's insane. The North Pole is the
South Pole. Yes. On Earth. Oh my god.
That is effing ridiculous. Yeah.
Oh jeez. You didn't know that? No, man.
That's crazy. Have you thought about
that? No. How we we call in our north
pole and north magnets point to it. Now
you point a north pole to a north pole
and it repels. Exactly. Something's
something Oh, something's going on
there. Wow. That's crazy. Yes. Earth's
south magnetic pole is the north pole.
Yes. That's insane.
I don't know what to believe anymore. I
can't believe anything anymore.
Okay. So now, so now why we had someone
ask from from down under, you can ask
what makes that the north pole of the
earth at all, right? Was that arbitrary?
Was that arbitrary as well? Yeah, cuz
from where we're sitting,
well, the folks in the South Pole, they
they might have another opinion on the
matter. Exactly. Okay. Exactly. That's
another one. Criy. Okay. Anyway, that's
another one that's decided by decree.
Arbitrary consensus.
Okay. And you know how we get it. You
ask which way is the earth spinning.
Okay. Okay. Curl your hand. Take your
right hand. Mhm. Curl your fingers in
the direction earth is spinning. Now
point your thumb up. That's the north
pole. Yeah. Look at that. So that's it.
That's it. But suppose most people were
left-handed then. There's no left-hand
rule. It's only a right-hand rule. Okay.
See? And uh there's your plus most
people are not left-handed. That's my
point. We're discriminating against left
hand. So you think if left people
dominated dominantly left-handed, we
would probably done it the other way.
Oh, so then the North Pole would have
been in the south. Yeah. If they did the
left hand rule. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. You do
that for any rotating object. That's how
you can say that the planet Uranus is
tipped 98 degrees from the vertical. Oh,
okay. How's that possible if you just
have another axis that's up there?
Right. Because the right hand rule it's
the space takes it down down below.
That's so cool, man. Yeah, that's very
cool. That's how you can have a planet
that's 180 degrees flipped, right? Why
don't you just say, well, just call that
north. No, because the rotation
rotation. Yeah. Okay. That's so cool,
man. All right. Here we go. All right.
Good. I think we have time for one more
question or two if I answer each and
half the time. I did the math. Okay, go.
Here we go. This is Hugo Dart. He says,
"Hello, Dr. Tyson Lord nice. This is
Hugo Dart from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Brazil. He says, "With my seven-year-old
daughter, Olivia, who is a big fan of
your show. Here's my question. If you
had to bet on one breakthrough in
astrophysics happening in the next 50
years, what would that one breakthrough
be?" It would be We would know for sure
whether there was life elsewhere in the
solar system, not on Earth. Cool. either
in the oceans of Europa or in the soils
of Mars, right? With where we think the
water has gone, uh we will know for sure
whether there is or there is not, right?
And if there is not, that's important
information. Very much so. And if there
is, that's even more important. I think
we'll know that probably in the next 30
years based on missions that are
scheduled. Another question. So, okay,
here we go. This is Logan Sinette who
says, "Hello, Dr. Tyson. Lord Nice."
Logan's a cool name. Logan is a cool
name. That is badass. He says, "This is
Logan from Phoenix, Arizona here. Have
you mentioned that the best telescope
discoveries are unexpected discoveries?
So I was wondering if the JWST has made
any interesting unexpected discoveries
thus far and if so which one interests
you most?
When I was coming up Mhm. there was the
record for what's the farthest object in
the universe? Okay. And it's measured by
red shift. So and the with the letter Z
and there's a mathematical form for
that. But the bigger is the Z, the
bigger is the the farther away the
object is. Okay. In my day, the farthest
objects were Z of five. Okay. Okay. When
I was growing coming up in ranks, we
might have hit six when we built the
Rose Center 25 years ago. Okay. The
farther away it is, the closer back in
time it's getting to the beginning of
the correct. Right. But not only that,
start from the beginning of the
universe, you couldn't make anything
until the universe cooled down. Right.
All right. to the point where matter
forms like atoms form. Now we have
atoms. Now the atoms can co coales and
make stars. Before they make stars, the
universe is still expanding. We call
that the dark ages. Hasn't made stars
yet. Oh wow. Okay. We called it the dark
ages. Interesting. All right. JWST looks
around. Found galaxies in the dark ages.
Red shift 14. Oh my gosh. 14. That's
crazy. My head is exploding. Yeah. So,
first, what? A galaxy at red shift 14?
Holy Okay. A. B. That's in the
dark ages when it ain't supposed to be
when it's not supposed to be there. So,
now we have an inongruency timewise.
Yes. Or we don't understand how we just
don't understand how galaxies form.
Correct. Which or we had a totally cool
dark
galaxy. Hey baby, this is me, your dark
galaxy. You can call me the chocolate
galaxy if you want.
That's all the time we have. Yes, that
was great. We got a lot in there, man.
We got so many questions in. Okay, so
shut up. No,
shut up.
This has been Star Talk Cosmic Aquarius
Edition. Neil deGrasse Tyson, your
personal astrophysicist. As always, keep
looking up.
[Music]